The value of the monad pattern goes beyond merely condensing code and providing a link to mathematical reasoning. Whatever language or default programming paradigm a developer uses, following the monad pattern brings many of the benefits of purely functional programming. By reifying a specific kind of computation, a monad not only encapsulates the tedious details of that computational pattern, but it does so in a declarative way, improving the code's clarity. As monadic values explicitly represent not only computed values, but computed effects, a monadic expression can be substituted with its value in referentially transparent positions, much like pure expressions can be, allowing for many techniques and optimizations based on rewriting.

Typically, programmers will use bind to chain monadic functions into a sequence, which has led some to describe monads as "programmable semicolons", a reference to how many imperative languages use semicolons to separate statements. However, it should be stressed that monads do not actually order computations; even in languages that use them as central features, simpler function composition can arrange steps within a program. A monad's general utility rather lies in simplifying a program's structure and improving separation of concerns through abstraction.

The monad structure can also be seen as a uniquely mathematical and compile time variation on the decorator pattern. Some monads can pass along extra data that is inaccessible to functions, and some even exert finer control over execution, for example only calling a function under certain conditions. Because they let application programmers implement domain logic while offloading boilerplate code onto pre-developed modules, monads can even be considered a tool for aspect-oriented programming.

One other noteworthy use for monads is isolating side-effects, like input/output or mutable state, in otherwise purely functional code. Even purely functional languages can still implement these "impure" computations without monads, via an intricate mix of function composition and continuation-passing style (CPS) in particular. With monads though, much of this scaffolding can be abstracted away, essentially by taking each recurring pattern in CPS code and bundling it into a distinct monad.

If a language does not support monads by default, it is still possible to implement the pattern, often without much difficulty. When translated from category-theory to programming terms, the monad structure is a generic concept and can be defined directly in any language that supports an equivalent feature for bounded polymorphism. A concept's ability to remain agnostic about operational details while working on underlying types is powerful, but the unique features and stringent behavior of monads set them apart from other concepts.
